Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi is a central sector scheme under the government of India which provides income support to the farmers and their families. PM-KISAN scheme was first implemented as the Rythu Bandhu scheme by the Government of Telangana where a certain amount was handed directly to the eligible farmers. Later, on 1 February 2019, during the 2019 Interim Union Budget of India, Piyush Goyal announced the implementation of this scheme as a nationwide project.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched the PM-KISAN scheme on 24 February 2019 in Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh. Under this scheme, all small and marginal farmers will be provided with income support of Rs.6,000 per year in three instalments which will be deposited directly to their bank accounts. The total annual expenditure for this scheme is expected to be Rs.75,000 crore which will be financed by the Union Government.
PM-KISAN Scheme is an important topic for the IAS Exam. Candidates can also download the notes PDF at the end of the article.
The candidates can read about other important relevant schemes from the links provided below:
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan-Dhan Yojana
PM-KUSUM Scheme
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)
About PM Kisan Yojana - Key Features of Scheme
The highlights of the PM-KISAN scheme are given in the table below:
Name of the scheme
PM-KISAN Yojana
Full-Form
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana
Date of launch
24th February 2019
Government Ministry
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
Official Website
https://pmkisan.gov.in/
Objectives of PM-KISAN scheme
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana is implemented as a central sector scheme by the Government of India. This scheme was introduced to augment the source of income of many small and marginal farmers. The main objectives of the PM-KISAN scheme are mentioned below:
To provide income support to all eligible land holding farmers and their families.
PM-KISAN scheme also aims to supplement the financial needs of the farmers in procuring various inputs to ensure proper crop health and appropriate yields, commensurate with the anticipated farm income.
The scheme is expected to increase the coverage of PM-KISAN to around 14.5 crore beneficiaries. It aims to cover around 2 crores more farmers with an estimated expenditure of Rs. 87,217.50 crores that will be funded by the Central Government.
Aspirants can know in detail about the Government Schemes for the Benefit of Farmers at the linked article.
Eligibility to avail benefits under PM-KISAN scheme
Any small or marginal farmer should not fall under the following criteria to be eligible under the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana. Below are some of the categories of beneficiaries who are not eligible for benefit under this scheme:
1. Any institutional land-holders.
2. The farmer as well as any member of the family belonging to the following categories:
3. Former and present holders of constitutional posts
4. Former and present Ministers/ State Ministers
5. Former or present members of LokSabha/ Rajyasabha/ State Legislative Assemblies/State Legislative Councils
6. Former and present Mayors of Municipal Corporations
7. Former and present Chairpersons of District Panchayats.
8. Any serving or retired officers as well as employees under the Central/ State Government Ministries/Offices/Departments.
9. All retired pensioners who get a monthly pension of Rs.10,000/-or more and belonging to the above category.
10. Any individual who paid their income tax in the last assessment year is not eligible under this scheme.
11. Professionals like Doctors, Engineers, Lawyers, Chartered Accountants, and Architects registered with Professional bodies and carrying out profession by undertaking practices.
The farmers eligible under the scheme are required to produce the below-mentioned documents for their verification:
Citizenship certificate
Landholding papers
Aadhaar card
Bank account details
Advantages of PM-KISAN Scheme
Given below are the advantages and the impact of the PM-KISAN schemes:
The direct transfer of funds is one of the biggest advantages of this scheme. On December 25, 2020, in the presence of PM Narendra Modi, Rs.18,000 crores were directly transferred to the bank accounts of 9 crore farmers
All the records related to farmers is registered officially on a digital platform which has made the registration and fund transfer easy. The digitalised records have brought about a new start to this welfare scheme
This scheme eases liquidity constraints of farmers
PM-KISAN yojana is a big step towards the Government's initiatives of modernisation of agriculture
There is no discrimination in choosing the PM-KISAN beneficiaries
Candidates should follow the latest developments in Current Affairs related to other government schemes for their UPSC 2022 preparation.
PM-KISAN Scheme (UPSC Notes):-
Download PDF Here
Frequently Asked Questions on PM Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana
QI Q1. What is the PM-KISAN Scheme?
Ans. PM-KISAN or the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana is a Central sector scheme to provide income support to all landholding farmers' families in the country to supplement their financial needs for procuring various inputs related to agriculture and allied activities as well as domestic needs.
Q2 Q 2. What are the benefits of PM-KISAN Scheme?
Ans. Under the PM-KISAN Scheme, the beneficiaries shall be provided with Rs.6,000 per annum/per family in equal instalments.
Q3 Q3. When and by whom was the PM-KISAN yojana launched?
Ans. The Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi launched the PM-KISAN scheme on February 24, 2019. The scheme came into effect from December 1, 2018.
Q4 Q 4. What is the key advantage of the PM-KISAN scheme?
Ans. Under the PM-KISAN scheme, the money will be transferred directly to the bank account of the beneficiary. This is one of the government's initiatives to modernise agriculture.
UPSC Preparation Links:
UPSC Calendar 2023
India Year Book - 5 Things to Know
UPSC Notes
UPSC Syllabus
UPSC Previous Years' Question Papers
UPSC Mains General Studies Paper-III Strategy, Syllabus & Structure
Daily Current Affairs
Topic-Wise GS 2 Questions for UPSC Mains
Topic-wise IAS Prelims Questions with Solutions
IAS Toppers Marks Subject Wise